Docs 923: Document `csi` camera module for the Jetson Orin Nano's embedded camera (#1716)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/extend/modular-resources/examples/csi.md

The module is open-sourced and available on [GitHub](https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi).

To use the CSI camera module, follow the [Installation](#installation) and [configuration](#configuration) steps.

## Installation

On your robot's computer, download [the `viam:camera:csi` appimage](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) and make it executable:

``` {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo wget https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi/releases/download/v0.0.2/viam-csi-0.0.2-aarch64.AppImage -O /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
```

## Configuration

{{< tabs name="Connect your CSI Module and Modular Resource">}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page and select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy and paste the JSON object for the module into the modules array to add Viam's `csi-mr` module:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
    "modules": [
      {
        "executable_path": "</usr/bin/csi-mr>",
        "name": "<your-csi-cam-module-name>"
      }
    ]

> }

Author: ```suggestion
}
```
```

Next, add the following JSON object to your components array toconfigure a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
      {
        "model": "viam:camera:csi",
        "attributes": {
          "width_px": <int>,
          "height_px": <int>,
          "frame_rate": <int>,
          "debug": "<boolean>"
        },
        "depends_on": [],
        "name": "<your-csi-cam-name>",
        "namespace": "rdk",
        "type": "camera"

>       }

Author: ```suggestion
      }
```
```

{
    "modules": [
      {
        "executable_path": "/usr/bin/csi-mr",
        "name": "csi_cam_module"
      }
    ],
    "components": [
      {
        "model": "viam:camera:csi",
        "attributes": {
          "width_px": 1920,
          "height_px": 1080,
          "frame_rate": 30,
          "debug": true
        },
        "depends_on": [],
        "name": "my_test_csi_cam",
        "namespace": "rdk",
        "type": "camera"
      }
    ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Save the config.
Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.

Check the [**Logs** tab](/program/debug/) of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your camera has connected and no errors are being raised.

The following attributes are available for the `viam:camera:csi` model:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `width_px` | int | Optional | Width of the image this camera captures in pixels. <br> Default: `1920` |
| `height_px` | int | Optional | Height of the image this camera captures in pixels. <br> Default: `1080` |
| `frame_rate` | int | Optional | The image capture frame rate this camera should use. <br> Default: `30` |

> | `video_path` | string | Optional | The filepath to the input sensor of this camera on your board. If none is given, your robot will attempt to detect the video path automatically <br> Default: `"0"` </br>  |

Author: ```suggestion
| `video_path` | string | Optional | The filepath to the input sensor of this camera on your board. If none is given, your robot will attempt to detect the video path automatically. <br> Default: `"0"` </br>  |
```

# SMEs: Sean
---

Many boards, like the Jetson Orin Nano, come with the option to use Camera Serial Interface (CSI) cameras, like [these cameras from E-con Systems](https://www.e-consystems.com/nvidia-jetson-agx-orin-cameras.asp) or [this camera from Seed Technologies](https://www.digikey.com/en/products/detail/seeed-technology-co.,-ltd/114992263/12396924).
These cameras are excellent for utilizing embedded vision systems like Viam's [vision service](/services/vision/).
Not all CSI cameras are supported by the [webcam camera model](/components/camera/webcam/).
Instead, Viam supports CSI cameras by providing a [modular resource](/extend/modular-resources/) for your CSI camera: `viam:camera:csi`.

This module includes a simple wrapper around `GStreamer` and a control interface for the **control** tab of the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) so you can utilize the hardware accelerated GST plugins and use the embedded CSI cameras on your `jetson` boards with Viam.

The module is open-sourced and available on [GitHub](https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi).

> To use the CSI camera module, follow the [Installation](#installation) and [configuration](#configuration) steps.

Author: ```suggestion
To use the CSI camera module, follow the [installation](#installation) and [configuration](#configuration) steps.
```

## Installation

On your robot's computer, download [the `viam:camera:csi` appimage](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) and make it executable:

``` {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo wget https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi/releases/download/v0.0.2/viam-csi-0.0.2-aarch64.AppImage -O /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
```

## Configuration

{{< tabs name="Connect your CSI Module and Modular Resource">}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page and select **Raw JSON** mode.

Copy and paste the JSON object for the module into the modules array to add Viam's `csi-mr` module:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
    "modules": [
      {
        "executable_path": "</usr/bin/csi-mr>",
        "name": "<your-csi-cam-module-name>"
      }
    ]
}
```

> Next, add the following JSON object to your components array toconfigure a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:

Author: ```suggestion
Next, add the following JSON object to your components array to configure a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:
```

This module includes a simple wrapper around `GStreamer` and a control interface for the **control** tab of the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) so you can utilize the hardware accelerated GST plugins and use the embedded CSI cameras on your `jetson` boards with Viam.

The module is open-sourced and available on [GitHub](https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi).

To use the CSI camera module, follow the [Installation](#installation) and [configuration](#configuration) steps.

## Installation

On your robot's computer, download [the `viam:camera:csi` appimage](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) and make it executable:

``` {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo wget https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi/releases/download/v0.0.2/viam-csi-0.0.2-aarch64.AppImage -O /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
```

## Configuration

{{< tabs name="Connect your CSI Module and Modular Resource">}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page and select **Raw JSON** mode.

> Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add Viam's `csi-mr` module: 

Author: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add Viam's `csi-mr` module:
```

> Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add Viam's `csi-mr` module:
> 
> ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
> {
>     "modules": [
>       {
>         "executable_path": "</usr/bin/csi-mr>",
>         "name": "<your-csi-cam-module-name>"
>       }
>     ]
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the JSON object for the module into the modules array to add Viam's `csi-mr` module:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
    "modules": [
      {
        "executable_path": "</usr/bin/csi-mr>",
        "name": "<your-csi-cam-module-name>"
      }
    ]
}
```
```

> Next, add the following raw JSON to configure a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:
> 
> ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
> { // "modules": [ ...] ,
>     "components": [
>       {
>         "model": "viam:camera:csi",
>         "attributes": {
>           "width_px": <int>,
>           "height_px": <int>,
>           "frame_rate": <int>,
>           "debug": "<boolean>"
>         },
>         "depends_on": [],
>         "name": "<your-csi-cam-name>",
>         "namespace": "rdk",
>         "type": "camera"
>       }
>     ]
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add the following JSON object to your components array toconfigure a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
      {
        "model": "viam:camera:csi",
        "attributes": {
          "width_px": <int>,
          "height_px": <int>,
          "frame_rate": <int>,
          "debug": "<boolean>"
        },
        "depends_on": [],
        "name": "<your-csi-cam-name>",
        "namespace": "rdk",
        "type": "camera"
      }
```
```

---
title: "Add a CSI Camera as a Modular Resource"
linkTitle: "CSI Camera"
weight: 40
type: "docs"
description: "Use the viam:camera:csi model to add a CSI Camera to your robot."
tags: ["board", "csi", "jetson", "serial", "module", "modular resources", "Python", "python SDK", "nvidia", "jetson orin", "jetson orin nano", "nano", "camera"]
# SMEs: Sean
---

> Viam provides a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [camera API](/components/camera/#api) as a new `viam:camera:csi` model of [camera](/components/camera/).

Author: ```suggestion
If after configuring a `jetson` board you want to add your Orin Nano's CSI camera to your robot, you can.
Viam provides a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [camera API](/components/camera/#api) as a new `viam:camera:csi` model of [camera](/components/camera/).
```

---
title: "Add a CSI Camera as a Modular Resource"
linkTitle: "CSI Camera"
weight: 40
type: "docs"
description: "Use the viam:camera:csi model to add a CSI Camera to your robot."
tags: ["board", "csi", "jetson", "serial", "module", "modular resources", "Python", "python SDK", "nvidia", "jetson orin", "jetson orin nano", "nano", "camera"]
# SMEs: Sean
---

> If after configuring a `jetson` board you want to add your Orin Nano's CSI camera to your robot, you can.

Author: ```suggestion
Many boards, like the Jetson Orin Nano, come with built-in Camera Serial Interface, or CSI, cameras. 
These cameras are excellent for utilizing embedded vision systems like Viam's [vision service](/services/vision/).
If after configuring a `jetson` board you want to add your Orin Nano's CSI camera to your robot, you can.
```

---
title: "Add a CSI Camera as a Modular Resource"
linkTitle: "CSI Camera"
weight: 40
type: "docs"
description: "Use the viam:camera:csi model to add a CSI Camera to your robot."
tags: ["board", "csi", "jetson", "serial", "module", "modular resources", "Python", "python SDK", "nvidia", "jetson orin", "jetson orin nano", "nano", "camera"]
# SMEs: Sean
---

> Many boards, like the Jetson Orin Nano, come with built-in Camera Serial Interface, or CSI, cameras.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many boards, like the Jetson Orin Nano, come with built-in Camera Serial Interface (CSI) cameras.
```
bit  many commas

These cameras are excellent for utilizing embedded vision systems like Viam's [vision service](/services/vision/).
Not all CSI cameras are supported by the [webcam camera model](/components/camera/webcam).

> Instead, Viam supports CSI cameras by providing a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular resource" text="modular resource" >}} for your CSI camera: `viam:camera:csi`.

Author: ```suggestion
Instead, Viam supports CSI cameras by providing a [modular resource](/extend/modular-resources/) for your CSI camera: `viam:camera:csi`.
```
Updating this part from inline as no glossary-tooltip

> If after configuring a `jetson` board you want to add your Orin Nano's CSI camera to your robot, you can.
> Viam provides a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [camera API](/components/camera/#api) as a new `viam:camera:csi` model of [camera](/components/camera/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all CSI cameras are supported by the [webcam camera model](/components/camera/webcam).
Instead, Viam supports CSI cameras by providing a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular resource" text="modular resource" >}} for your CSI camera: `viam:camera:csi`.
```
You say this but in a slightly roundabout way - that Viam provides a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [camera API](/components/camera/#api) as a new `viam:camera:csi` model of [camera](/components/camera/).
```

Author: LGTM, done

This module includes a simple wrapper around `GStreamer` and a control interface for the **control** tab of the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) so you can utilize the hardware accelerated GST plugins and use the embedded CSI cameras on your `jetson` boards with Viam.

The module is open-sourced and available on [GitHub](https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi).

[Install requirements](#requirements) and [configure](#configuration) the module to add an `viam:camera:csi` [camera](/components/camera/) {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" >}} to your robot.

> ## Requirements

Author: ```suggestion
## Installation
```

> [Install requirements](#requirements) and [configure](#configuration) the module to add an `viam:camera:csi` [camera](/components/camera/) {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" >}} to your robot.

Reviewer: How about this:

```suggestion
To use the CSI camera module, follow the [Installation](#installation) and [configuration](#configuration) steps.

## Installation
...
```

On your robot's computer, download [the `viam:camera:csi` appimage](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) and make it executable:

``` {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

> sudo wget https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi/releases/download/v0.0.2/viam-csi-0.0.2-aarch64.AppImage -O /usr/local/bin/viam-csi

Reviewer 2: We will want to update the install instructions once it is uploaded to the module registry.

sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
```

## Configuration

### Module

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page and select **Raw JSON** mode.
Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
    "modules": [
      {
        "executable_path": "/usr/bin/csi-mr",
        "name": "csi_cam_module"
      }
    ],
    "components": [
      {
        "model": "viam:camera:csi",
        "attributes": {
          "width_px": 1920,
          "height_px": 1080,
          "frame_rate": 30,
          "debug": true
        },
        "depends_on": [],
        "name": "my_test_csi_cam",
        "namespace": "rdk",
        "type": "camera"
      }
    ]
}
```

Save the config.
Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.

Check the [**Logs** tab](/program/debug/) of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your camera has connected and no errors are being raised.

> The following attributes are available for the `viam:camera:csi` model:

Reviewer 2: Thanks for adding the attribute parameters!

---
title: "Add a CSI Camera as a Modular Resource"
linkTitle: "CSI Camera"
weight: 40
type: "docs"

> description: "How to add a CSI Camera as a modular resource of your robot."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Use the viam:camera:csi model to add a CSI Camera to your robot."
```

This is the text that shows up in cards and previews - I think we want to avoid startign that with "How to"

Author: Sounds good!

tags: ["board", "csi", "jetson", "serial", "module", "modular resources", "Python", "python SDK", "nvidia", "jetson orin", "jetson orin nano", "nano", "camera"]

> # SMEs: Kim, Martha, Rand

Author: ```suggestion
# SMEs: Sean
```

---

> Viam provides a modular resource [extending](/extend/modular-resources/) the [camera API](/components/camera/#api) as a new `viam:camera:csi` model of [camera](/components/camera/).

Reviewer: I thin kyou want to provide the value before the explanation - what does this resource allow readers to do?

Author: Ok done I think. Sentence is a little bare though-- maybe revisit this feedback tmrw

Author: (I will revisit)

Author: Added more talking about what I think is the value-add of CSI cameras and explaining more about what they are-- lmk what you think. Using info from here but not sure whether or not to link @npentrel  https://embeddedcomputing.com/technology/analog-and-power/mipi-csi-2-v3-0-enhances-imaging-reduces-cabling-for-embedded-systems-designers

Reviewer: This is good but I think what's missing is why I'd need to use this over the normal camera component - see suggestion.

Reviewer 2: This sounds good. In the context of Jetson devices one of the major advantages is using the hardware-accelerated [ISP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_processor) (image signal processing) library on the host machine called [libargus](https://docs.nvidia.com/jetson/l4t-multimedia/group__LibargusAPI.html).

Also, mechanically reliable connection from the camera to the host machine on mobile robotics platforms. (As opposed to using usb cables/ports).

This module includes a simple wrapper around `GStreamer` and a control interface for the **control** tab of the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) so you can utilize the hardware accelerated GST plugins and use the embedded CSI cameras on your `jetson` boards with Viam.

The module is open-sourced and available on [GitHub](https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi).

> [Install requirements](#requirements) and [configure](#configuration) the module to add an `viam:camera:csi` [camera](/components/camera/) {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" >}} to your robot.

Reviewer: missing article in `Install requirements` but that also doesn't sound super great? Should that be "get the modular resouce" or something like that?

Author: Hmmm I can change here but I don't know if we actually need to change the beginning of the sentence! I think that without article is actually the normal way to say it, but I could be wrong 😆 Requirements as a noun and directive, right? Like a medium article?

## Requirements

On your robot's computer, download [the `viam:camera:csi` appimage](https://github.com/viamrobotics/odrive) and make it executable:

``` {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
sudo wget https://github.com/seanavery/viam-csi/releases/download/v0.0.2/viam-csi-0.0.2-aarch64.AppImage -O /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/bin/viam-csi
```

## Configuration

### Module

{{< tabs name="Add the csi module">}}

> {{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

Reviewer: If there's just one tab this shouldn't have tabs

Author: Removed! that makes sense

Author: Un-removed for template/example

Go to your robot's page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Navigate to the **Config** tab on your robot's page and select **Raw JSON** mode.

> Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add a `csi` [camera](/components/camera) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:

Author: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following raw JSON to add a `csi` [camera](/components/camera/) component with the name `my_test_csi_cam`:
```

> ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

Reviewer: it might be good to separate this and ask them to first add the module to the modules array and then the component to the components array - just to ensure people don't copy this and add it to the raw json, resulting in two components keys or osmething like that

Author: @seanavery built this for users in the repo and I just copied/pasted-- assume it was for ease of configuration and not having to add the module separately, but splitting out would make a lot more sense if I also added a tab for config builder. @seanavery is it ok to split out and do that?

Reviewer: that's only easy if there's no other modules/components present though ;)

Reviewer 2: @sguequierre Yes, it should be ok to split up the config for clarity in the documentation. I think it still makes sense to keep example config as single json file in the module repo.

Reviewer: @sguequierre let's make this tabbed then, with a template and an example

Author: @npentrel Ok, sounds good! Thanks guys!

Author: @npentrel Ok, sounds good! Thanks guys! Will comment when done

Author: @npentrel Tabbed with template and example

Author: @npentrel Done I beleive

        "attributes": {
          "width_px": 1920,
          "height_px": 1080,
          "frame_rate": 30,
          "debug": true
        },
        "depends_on": [],
        "name": "my_test_csi_cam",
        "namespace": "rdk",
        "type": "camera"
      }
    ]
}
```

Save the config.
Edit and fill in the attributes as applicable.

Check the [**Logs** tab](/program/debug/) of your robot in the Viam app to make sure your camera has connected and no errors are being raised.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

The following attributes are available for the `viam:camera:csi` model:

| Name | Type | Inclusion | Description |
| ---- | ---- | --------- | ----------- |
| `width_px` | int | Optional | Width of the image this camera captures in pixels. <br> Default: `1920` |
| `height_px` | int | Optional | Height of the image this camera captures in pixels. <br> Default: `1080` |
| `frame_rate` | int | Optional | The image capture frame rate this camera should use. <br> Default: `30` |
| `video_path` | string | Optional | The filepath to the input sensor of this camera on your board. If none is given, your robot will attempt to detect the video path automatically. <br> Default: `"0"` |

> | `debug` | boolean | Optional | Whether or not you want debug input from this camera in your robot's logs. <br> Example: `true` |

Author: ```suggestion
| `debug` | boolean | Optional | Whether or not you want debug input from this camera in your robot's logs. <br> Default: `false` |
```
